

Quick Start 
Overview  
Open Campus is a Layer-3 solution enhancing Ethereum, providing an EVM-compatible 
environment for seamless integration. It utilizes advanced cryptographic techniques for 
efficiency and inherits Ethereum's security. 
Connecting to Codex  
Reminder 
Open Campus Codex and its related documentation are under active development. 
All feedback is welcome and highly appreciated. Please report errors or inconsistencies to a 
team member or as an issue on our Issues Tracker, thank you. 
To manually add the Open Campus Codex network to your wallet, use the following details: 
● Codex 
RPC URL ChainID Block Explorer 
URL 
Currency 
https://rpc.open-campus-codex.gelato.di
gital 
656476 Codex Block 
Explorer 
EDU 
To add the network to MetaMask, you can either enter the data above manually or use the link 
provided at the bottom of the Codex Block Explorer page. 
Bridging Assets to Open Campus Codex Testnet  
To start interacting with the Open Campus Codex Testnet, you'll need to bridge your assets. 
Bridging assets involves transferring cryptocurrencies from one blockchain (Arbitrum Sepolia) to 
another (Open Campus Codex). This process expands your asset's utility by enabling its use 
within the Open Campus ecosystem. 
To bridge your assets, follow the guide on asset bridging provided below. 
Learn more about bridging assets
 ↗ 
Deploying Smart Contracts on Codex  
Open Campus Codex provides a development environment that is designed to be familiar to 
those who have worked with Ethereum. It allows developers to deploy smart contracts using 
existing Ethereum tools and workflows, ensuring a smooth transition and a user experience 
characterized by higher throughput and reduced transaction costs. 

To learn more about how to deploy your smart contracts to the Codex, refer to our 
comprehensive guide below. 
Deploy Smart Contracts on Codex
 ↗ 
Support Channels  
For support, developers can consult the community on platforms like StackExchange or join the 
official Discord server. 
 
 